[Music]
hello there good morning welcome to
breakfast with naga manchetti and john k
our headlines today coronavirus
infections dropped by two-thirds in
england in the last month but scientists
behind
the study warned that virus levels are
still high
a call for more support for frontline
staff suffering long-term effects from
kovid we've got a special report this
morning on the impact
i just feel that i am running every
single day
entirely exhausted and i have no idea
when this will end the duke of edinburgh
spends a second
night in hospital after he was admitted
as a precautionary measure on tuesday
good morning charging towards an
electric future
jaguar land rover and ford commit to
going all electric in the uk in the next
decade
i'll find out what it could mean for
drivers
why time's running out for a riding
school that supports young people with
disabilities it's just got a
week to raise a million pounds if it's
going to survive
good morning we've got a band of rain
currently moving west to east
that will clear all but the far
northwest of scotland behind it we
return to sunshine and showers
and it's going to be a fairly windy day
today and cooler than yesterday
i'll have all the details later in the
programme
[Music]
good morning it's thursday the 18th of
february our top story is that
scientists tracking the coronavirus
pandemic
say that there's been a strong decline
in covet infection levels in england
since the current lockdown began yes
imperial college london's react
study found that rates have dropped by
two-thirds
but there are warnings that virus levels
are still high with one in every 200
people testing positive our health
correspondent jim reed has the latest
the react study measures infections in
the community
and is one of the largest of its type
researchers swabbed
85 000 randomly selected people in
england
over the first half of february positive
covid tests fell by more than two-thirds
since the last report in january it's
really important to note
that that the prevalence is still high
we're at the level we were at maybe in
late september of last year
one in 200 people are testing positive
in in the population as a whole and we
really have to get those rates even
lower
the timing of the study means tougher
lockdown rules were likely to be behind
the fallen infections
with the impact of the vaccine rollout
still to be felt
there were regional variations in london
around 0.5 percent of people were
infected
down sharply since the last report in
the southeast of england it was 0.3
percent
roughly the same as in the west midlands
the highest rates were in the northwest
and north east of england though
infections there too were falling
in a statement the health secretary matt
hancock said the findings show
encouraging signs
we're now heading in the right direction
across the country
but warns the public must remain
vigilant and follow the rules as the
vaccination program
continues but the number in hospital
with kovid
is still above the peak of the first
wave of the pandemic
infections might be falling but from a
very high level
the government will have to make some
difficult choices as it starts to set
out its plan
to ease the lockdown in england next
week
jim reid bbc news
the duke of edinburgh has spent a second
night in hospital after being admitted
on tuesday as a precautionary measure
he's expected to remain at the king
edward the seventh hospital in london
for the next few days for observation
and rest let's speak to our reporter
charlotte wright who's there for us this
morning
and charlotte i guess we're waiting for
some kind of update
yes morning john a second morning in
hospital for
the duke uh after he was admitted as a
precautionary measure as you say on
tuesday evening
no update yet from the palace and i
think we're unlikely really to get a
running commentary
on his condition we do know that he had
been unwell for a few days before he was
admitted to hospital on tuesday evening
kovid has been ruled out we do know of
course that he had his
first covid vaccination along with the
queen last month
at windsor castle but he has been
admitted here
for rest and observation we're told now
when he came here on tuesday evening he
did come in a car and he got out and
walked into the hospital
unaided and we're told that he was in
good spirits
but i think everybody is just being very
cautious at the moment the medics are
being very cautious he is of course
99 years old and celebrates his 100th
birthday
in four months time the queen
is currently at windsor she's not here
at the moment and we're told that she
has been continuing with her royal
duties
much the same for the duke and duchess
of cornwall as well they were
out and about on a royal visit yesterday
so while we wait for an update from the
palace i think the message very much
from the royals at the moment
is keep calm and carry on charlotte
a good message thanks very much indeed
sakira stama will use a speech this
morning to set out his vision for
rebuilding the country
after the covid crisis ends let's talk
more about the labour leader with our
chief political correspondent
adam fleming adam always good to see you
so
are we going to hear something concrete
something that's going to revitalize
perhaps the labour
party after quite a few voices of like
rumblings of discontent in recent days
well there's going to be some short-term
stuff and some long-term stuff from keir
starmer today
in the short term he's going to look
ahead to the budget which is in less
than two weeks
and he'll call for things like the
temporary increased universal credit to
be extended
and the vat cut for hospitality to be
extended to help that
industry so he can get a bit of credit
if those things
happen and in the long term he's going
to talk about this idea of the country
being a fork in the road
where it has to decide what kind of
economic recovery
it wants and he is going to offer one
where the government gets
really involved in people's lives and
with helping business
now the problem for keir starmer is that
that sounds quite similar to what boris
johnson
has been doing and wants to do too so is
that really
a choice and he's also going to talk
about giving the public
you and me a stake in what happens in
the future and i'm told there could be a
quite eye-catching concrete proposal in
that area
but we'll have to wait for a couple of
hours to find out what the labour leader
is actually going to propose okay so we
can wait for that
um we have been talking to the care
minister helen waitley on this programme
um talking about making care home visits
easier
and also all of that in light of
vaccination take up as well
so you can visit people in care homes
now
they just can't be normal visits there
has to be things in place like
screens or you do it through a window or
you wear lots of
protective gear but she was asked by you
guys
about what visits could look like in the
future and this is what she said
as we come out of this national lockdown
i really want to enable more visiting
so that people can go back to you know
holding hands being able to
to real have have have much more like
normal contact
with their relatives loved ones in care
homes i think it's been one of the
hardest things of this pandemic so i
really want us to open up
i don't want to have to wait for the
second vaccination as clearly
that's really important to give care
home residents maximum protection but i
really want us to be able to
open up i say cautiously and carefully
um but to enable residents some contact
with family members because i know it's
just so so important
now what i think is interesting about
that is it shows that visits to care
homes are a bit like
everything else in the whole opening up
debate and that there is not
a direct straight line between lots of
people having the vaccine
and everything going back to normal and
i think that will be the theme
of the prime minister's roadmap for
unlocking the lockdown in england
which we're still waiting for and which
is still due on monday
we're waiting for any kinds of hints
aren't we for that road map
um adam thanks very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news